Welcome back. We're at lecture A9. Are
you excited? Yes. We're almost done. I'm
exhausted but happy. So, um we're going
to do modeling events today. It's uh two
big themes in this lecture. The first is
teach you uh the general structure of
generalized linear models. And we move
past purely linear models to generalized
linear models as a category focusing on
the example of binomial and berni
models. And then topically it's about
modeling events. Events are things that
get counted. They're not continuous
measurements. Uh and that's a big
category of things in science. So you
really need to know how to do it. uh and
then the um context I'm going to do it
in is in the context of statistical
modeling of discrimination which is an
interdisciplinary topic that I myself am
sometimes uh obsessed with people have
told me but I think it illustrates the
real value of some explicit causal
inference and structural modeling to
make sense of of the data uh there's a
metaphor I want to start with uh this is
Lord Kelvin's tide prediction engine.
One of them. I think this is the second
one he built. Lord Kelvin is a Scottish
scientist engineer. I forget his real
name. Kelvin is a river near Glasgow in
Scotland. And Lord Kelvin was the, you
know, the lord of that land. Um, I
forget the guy's real name. This was
back when all scientists were rich
people because it's the only way you
could afford to do science, right?
Because it didn't generate much income
unless some royal person wanted to pay
you for it. Um but he built mechanical
computers among many other things. And
uh this is what's being traced out on
the left part here by that weird arm is
a prediction of the tide levels. And
there's a bunch of gears which interact
and add together in complicated ways to
produce that continuous prediction. This
is what generalized linear models are
like. In fact, many statistical models
once you get outside of very simple
linear regressions are the internal guts
of the thing are on some scale that is
not the outcome scale of interest. Uh
linear regressions are nice and
cognitively convenient despite their
difficulties because the uh scale on the
right hand side and left hand side are
the same. Yeah, they're the same things.
They just passes through. You have a
direct model of the mean as an additive
combination on the left that
measurement. This is not true of any
other type of statistical model. Sorry.
And you have to model the other kinds of
events. It's just true. Uh good news is
it's not that bad once you get used to
the idea. Um these machines can be
constructed with Legos too. Here's a
Lego type prediction engine which also
functions. Just to show you that uh it
doesn't have to be as complicated as
Lord Kelvin's as well. Um, generalized
linear models are meant to map uh
additive combinations of predictors like
the sorts you've been doing before. Uh,
which again, why do we like additive
combinations of predictors? It's one of
the simplest ways to do statistical
conditioning to stratify. Why do we want
to stratify? Because it's the only way
to get causally valid estimates. Yeah,
remember the adjustment sets and all
that stuff from the DAX. uh but we need
to map those additive combinations those
those stratifying variables onto outcome
distributions uh that appear in nature
which are not simply Gaussian. Uh so
we've been working with Gaussian before
which is in the upper right here and
this is my sort of uh relationship
diagram for for the distributions that
are most common in applied statistics.
And they're most common in applied
statistics because they're everywhere in
nature. These are the fundamental
distributions of generative processes in
nature. Uh there's a whole chapter in my
book about these and the generative
processes that generate them. I'm not
going to spend a lot of time in this
lecture. Unfortunately, I love this
topic, but there's just not enough time.
Um these are these distributions are not
made up by statistitians to annoy you.
Right? These are things you find in
nature like the Gaussian distribution.
Uh so at the middle here, this is called
the exponential family. It's a family
tree and right in the middle is um the
the distribution right so what we call
that English the great great-grandparent
the uh primal primal distribution that's
a better translation which is the
exponential
um and then there are various ways that
you can transform exponentials into all
of the others uh these things are there
they're related to generative models um
and therefore to causal inference um and
I want to give you a glimpse into how we
use them productively and interpret
them. Uh, this material is, I've said
this before, I just want to say it again
very quickly. This material is
complicated. So, if you're feeling
confused, it's only because you're
paying attention, right? That's true.
It's perfectly normal. You just have to
understand enough to flow forward a bit,
right? So, you're not sinking. And
that's normal. Don't feel like you're
the only one. Um, it's it's a real
problem in teaching applied statistics
that so everything comes at you all at
once. You've got the scientific models,
research, design, and and coding and and
uh everything else uh inflation, right?
It's just hitting you at once. I'm very
sympathetic to that. But you don't have
to get it all at once. You you will be
able to effectively do applied
statistics before you understand it. And
that's that's a good thing. I'll say it
again. You'll be able to effectively do
applied statistics before you fully
understand it. But you the understanding
will come with practice in the contexts
the scientific context where you have
the scientific background to understand
the physical output in light of the
generative models in your discipline.
Okay, it really happens that way. So you
need to practice it. It's like learning
kung fu. You cannot watch Jackiechan
movies and learn kung fu, right? You got
to go, you know, throw some punches and
get hit a bit, right? You got to train
the motor memory. And the same is true u
with statistics.
Okay. Oh, this this cartoon is just say
like, I know sometimes the homework
seems hard, but you should try research.
Yeah, it's even harder. I'm just trying
to build a ladder for you that gets up
to that, right? Uh but that's just how
it is. Of course, you have more time to
do your research than to do the
homework. But, uh uh I'm trying to I'm
trying to find that middle ground in the
homeworks where it represents a real
challenge in applied that it's not
trivial, right? Like I'm really teaching
you skills you need, but it's something
you can practice. It's not as hard as as
real research and sometimes I overshoot.
I apologize, but I'm just trying to
figure out where that spot is, the sweet
spot is every time. The data set we're
going to work with today is this uh in
statistics, a somewhat famous small data
set because it's um from a paper from
the late 70s. um and it's been u used a
bunch in teaching in statistics to to
illustrate something called Simpsons
paradox uh which which I'd be happy to
talk about but I don't plan to talk
about today. Um it is uh around 4,500
PhD applications for the 1973 UC
Berkeley um uh admitting class. And uh
here I'm showing you the whole data set.
There are 12 rows. That's what I like
about teaching data sets like this. You
can just put it on one slide. Um and
what we've got is uh a number of
departments
uh one two three four five six
departments and in each of them we've
got the total number of applications
that were submitted that year and then
the number that were accepted and the
number that were rejected and then we've
stratified those counts by the uh
self-reported gender of the applicants
male and female and these data were uh
used internally in UC Berkeley. This is
how it came to the attention of the
statistitian who wrote the report on it
because there was a question internally
by UC Berkeley's administration. This is
a very healthy thing whether there was
gender discrimination in admissions.
Yeah. So they internally did this. They
weren't forced, right? And so they they
compiled this data set for that reason.
And what I want to do is walk you
through um modeling these data. These
are counts. These are obviously not
normally distributed. Maybe I shouldn't
say that. They're not normally
distributed. It may not be obvious yet,
but it will be. Uh, so how can we model
counts? That's one of the extremely
common form of data. If you're an
archaeologist, like almost everything's
a count, right?
I don't know if there if you agree with
that, but it's like counts of stuff,
minimum numbers, uh, how many toe bones,
things like that. Um,
how can we model uh counts? And then how
can we causally model something like
this and actually ask a question is
there discrimination by admissions
officers. Um this kind of research this
is still contemporary. It goes on as I
said I've been accused of being obsessed
with this kind of statistical problem
before because it transports across
domains a lot and there are lots of
really naive papers every year published
by specialists in particular fields who
don't know the general statistical
literature on this. So I like I don't
mean to pick on these two papers, but
I'm going to pick on these two papers.
Here are two papers that came out in the
same year, 2022, using the same data
about the same population, which is
members of the National Academy of
Sciences. And they reach almost opposite
conclusions.
Um neither of them are right in my
opinion or rather I should say neither
they're not even wrong because there's
no causal framework in either for us to
figure out what the estimates mean. This
is causal salad. I know I'm very
critical of these papers, but it's just
you give people who are rightly
interested for very good reasons in the
the problem of gender discrimination or
discrimination against some other
protected category. They've got a data
set at their disposal. They think we
could analyze this without noticing that
there's a hundred years of statistitians
talking about how hard it is to do this
in cross-sectional data sets. So, I'm
going to lay that out for you today so
you can understand. Uh I'm convinced
there's a lot of gender discrimination
in these domains, but not because of
cross-sectional data sets. It's because
of the testimonies of individuals who
have suffered it. Right? I'm an
ethnographer
at the heart. You talk to people, you
know, you've got rich stories. The
cross-sectional data sets are very hard
to model in these things, but I'm going
to show you how we could try to do it uh
with a goal of transparently laying out
the assumptions that would be required
to reach different conclusions. Yeah.
Okay. Sorry for the rant. There'll be
another [laughter]
um modeling events. So what do I mean by
events? I mean discrete unordered
outcomes uh things that can happen.
Yeah. Um in the other section last week,
uh the most recent lecture I gave was
also about modeling events. It was black
cat adoptions. If you're interested in
that, it's up on YouTube. That's a kind
of event the cat is adopted or it's not.
And we modeled how long it would take,
how long black cats wait to be adopted
compared to other coat colors of cats.
And yes, black cats are discriminated
against. Poor things. Adopt a black cat.
Okay. They're good cats. Um
okay. Uh the observations of events are
counts of the particular unordered
discrete um events. And uh uh the
unknowns though are not counts, they're
probabilities. And this is different
from all the models we've done so far in
this section where we were modeling a
measurement on the left that is
distributed normally. And the mean that
is the the the units on the additive
predictor are the same thing. They have
the same units as the outcome. Yeah.
Whether it's kilograms or miles or
whatever it was. And that's not true
anymore. The parameters in count models
are probabilities or log odds. I'll
explain what those are uh when we get to
it. And the outcome is counts. And that
just has to be that way because that's
the way the nature is. Okay? You can't
observe probabilities. They're fictions
that humans make up. Yeah. Um at least
if you're a basian. And uh uh but counts
are things that you can measure. Yeah.
Uh and we want to relate these together.
But there's a very justifiable and
powerful way to do this. In models of
this type, generalized linear models,
everything interacts whether or not you
explicitly encode an interaction effect.
So in linear regressions, uh many of you
will know uh there's this convention of
multiplying predictors together to
construct a linear interaction term. Uh
I showed you ways to do it also by
subsetting by index variables to create
interactions. Those are all great
strategies, but in in purely linear
models, you must explicitly construct
the interactions. make the effect of one
thing depend upon the another by
explicitly encoding it in the prediction
equation. That is not true in a
generalized linear model. You can still
do that, right? And there are good
reasons to, but everything will interact
anyway because of ceiling and floor
effects. So say we're modeling the
probability uh that that salamander
dies. Uh I know it's macob, but this
bear with me. This is also the example
in the book. Um if one thing kills it,
nothing else can. That's an interaction
effect, right? You can't kill the
salamander twice.
Yeah. Does that make sense? Okay, good.
Sorry, I work a lot with ecologists, so
I'm often thinking about things like
this. But, um, okay. And then we're
going to deal with this weird thing
called log odds when we get there, and
I'll explain how that works. Okay. Uh,
yes. Um, the core basian workflow. I'm
I'm gonna reference this just a couple
times today because I think you're used
to it. But we're going to start with the
generative model and the estimate as
always and work our way into the count
data. But we're going to start by
thinking about the generative model and
and the different kinds of estimates,
different kinds of causal queries we
could make about it in the context of
these admissions data. So the the vague
estimand is was there gender
discrimination in graduate admissions?
And I want to problematize this a little
bit. I'm going to build up a simple
causal model uh which which is uh in
this case sort of unarguably right but
incomplete that is it's missing
variables. I want to explain that to you
as well and then show you the different
kinds of estimates that relate to it. So
the first thing here is the idea that
gender influences admission. Um uh and
the background to this of course is it's
it's gender as judged by the admissions
officer, the person reading the
application, right? It's not the direct
effect of the gender, but the the gender
identification in the context of judging
an application may affect admission. Um
and if that's true, that feels like
discrimination, right? We don't want
that to happen. It's not that there's
something else that's that's correlated
with gender that's doing it. And there
are things which are downstream of
gender um which also affect emission
like which department you apply to in
this data set. Um it not be a surprise
to any of you. Most of you are
anthropologists right? Uh [laughter]
anthropology does not have an even
gender ratio and has not for 50 years I
think something like that. I participate
a lot in two different disciplines. One
is anthropology other is statistics.
These have opposite gender ratios. It's
like going to the different conferences
is like entering different universes for
me. Just really strange. I feel much
better in anthropology to be honest.
Maybe I shouldn't say things like that,
but um uh anyway, so uh uh the gender
ratios in departments affect things. And
so um and that also affects your
admission because some departments are
let's say way more popular than others.
They get way more applications than they
can possibly accept.
uh and therefore if if that effect the
saturation of a department is correlated
with the gender ratio in the department
there will be uh what I'm going to call
structural discrimination in the total
system right uh not direct
discrimination by judging gender but
just by the choices of the individuals
of where they apply um and we can have a
an interesting discussion about whether
whether we are comfortable with that or
not I am not I will just say [laughter]
right now Structural discrimination is
still discrimination. Yeah. Um, okay.
This relates to other kinds of
discrimination, too. Wage
discrimination. People study it with the
same kind of DAG. You've got some
protected status. Uh, it could be
cultural background, ethnicity, gender.
Um, uh, and then that influences
occupational choices and there may also
be direct effects on wage through direct
discrimination.
So, taste based discrimination as well.
same kind of structure. Um I've I've
published with some of my colleagues a
few papers on police discrimination
mainly in the US. Some of you know about
this topic. Um also has a similar kind
of causal structure. Uh ethnicity
influences probably you get stopped by
the police and there may be indirect and
direct effects of being assaulted by the
police as a consequence of that as well.
And trying to tease these things apart
in observational data sets. hard, but
it's worth trying is what I want to
argue. Okay, I this is a long walk.
Let's get to what is discrimination.
There all there's lots of discrimination
in here and you just have to be clear
about what you're talking about. There's
direct discrimination. Sometimes this is
called status based or taste based
discrimination.
um where the person judging the
application makes a judgment about the
person's gender and this influences
maybe unconsciously, maybe consciously
um the probability of accepting uh the
individual. Uh there's also indirect
discrimination, sometimes called
structural discrimination where it's not
the admissions officer that's doing it.
It's just that um uh individuals of some
genders uh tend to preferentially apply
to departments which are saturated in
applications. and so they have a lower
probability of their application being
accepted and so in the total population
across all departments there's
discrimination does that make sense with
grant applications too and that will be
your homework problem so I have a data
set from more recent times uh that's
that's grant applications
um does this make sense yeah and then
there's the total discrimination right
where we add up all these paths and this
is the total discrimination effect as
well which is what individuals across
all of the departments experience.
Um, and the question of which is
discrimination depends upon your
research question and what kind of
interventions or policy issues you're
interested in or which subjective
experiences and that's that's they're
all legitimate kinds of questions in
different contexts. Yeah. Question. So
what you didn't like about the two
papers you showed us earlier is that
they didn't define well they've got no
dags. [laughter]
They've got no dags and they got no
estimates even. It's like I challenge
you to read those papers and figure out
what they were thinking they were
estimating. It's really and I don't
again I keep saying I don't want to pick
on those papers in particular but I
clearly am no but there are lots of
papers like that that come out like and
I follow this literature. So I get kind
of kind of exercised about it in a lot
of fields. It's just a general symptom
of the causal salad approach to
regression modeling that but it
manifests in an area that I care about.
So I get more angry about it. That's
all. But your question is a very good
one. Yeah, there's different flaws in
the different ones, but it's just very
hard to piece together in those papers
exactly what their regression strategy
is trying to achieve. They've got some
variables and they make some
regressions, but they don't justify them
in particular estimation
and then the papers use the same data to
reach opposite conclusions. It's really
frustrating sort of problem. Um anyway,
I hope I answered your question. Yeah.
Does that make sense? Okay. Uh sorry, I
I again I'm very invested in this topic
and you can get me to go off on a
tangent about it with very little
effort. Um Okay. point I want to make
that's about statistics. Now, uh the
total as is often true in these causal
systems, the total causal effect is
something you can estimate. Just
stratify by gender, right? If we're
interested in total discrimination in
the whole system, that's easy to do. We
can confidently estimate that. There are
no arrows into gender in this data set,
right? So, it's not confounded. We can
estimate that. But most people don't
want that, right? So the the thing you
can estimate is not what you want. And
the things that you want are hard to
estimate. By hard, I mean you need to
make strong assumptions. And those are
the two on the right, the indirect and
direct effects. You have to make strong,
sometimes implausibly strong assumptions
to say that you've estimated the causal
effect without bias. I want to say um
even if you can't eliminate bias, it's
still worth doing the estimate. Yeah,
these are important problems and if
you're waiting for the perfect data set
and experimental design to study them,
you're going to be waiting your whole
life, right? We just have to be open and
transparent about the risks of bias, try
to walk out transparently what direction
we think the bias goes and what its
magnitude may be. Um, and I think in the
next lecture I'm going to pick up this
and maybe talk about that and like
adding bias to these models. Uh, if that
that might be interesting to you, you
can rebel at the end of this lecture and
let me know. Um does this make sense?
Yeah. Uh in particular when I say
requires strong assumptions, let me
bring up one. One strong assumption is
there's no unobserved confounding. I
think it's very very likely in these
situations that there's unobserved
confounding of this type that there's a
common cause of choice of department and
admission chance. All you need to
believe is there's heterogeneity and
ability among the candidates for
whatever reason. their educational
background, how rich they were when they
grow up, um natural talent, whatever
that means, right? It could just be
their perseverance in studying. I think
personality variation like that, your
ability to a lot of us as professional
academics, right? What is our what is
our what is our great skill? The ability
to sit and do boring things for
countless hours at a time, right? It's
like our superpower.
Yeah. It's just an incredible thing.
Yeah. Just keep fighting with that data
set, right? Most most rational people
would give up and start another job but
we are into this right. So those sorts
of things uh people are heter
heterogeneous in that this affects
ability. This will affect uh choice of
department because of the nature of the
work in different disciplines. It
appeals to different people um or how
competitive different disciplines are
and people of higher ability will be
more likely to apply to the more
competitive disciplines because they
have a comparative advantage and that
will also affect their acceptance
probabilities. Right? I don't think this
is a difficult uh thing scenario to
understand. Um like it happens a lot in
these circumstances. Uh so given this um
you can estimate the total causal effect
of G in this graph. But once you start
stratifying by D note that D is a
collider on the path between uh G and A.
Yeah. So once you stratify by department
you've opened up a biasing path. The
unobserved confounding on DNA does
nothing if you just want to estimate the
total causal effect, but you turn it on
when you stratify by department. Okay.
So again, next lecture I want to talk
about this more, but I'm going to ignore
it for the rest of this lecture. Okay,
but I wanted to get this out in front of
you to think about it.
Good. Yeah, there's nodding. I
appreciate your nodding. I feel like I'm
ranting because I'm just so like
invested in this topic, right? Okay, now
we have our little dag. Isn't it cute?
there on the left. Um, I've removed the
unobserved confounding because we're not
going to think about it again. And I've
written down an estimation,
which isn't to say this is the only
thing worth estimating, but I want to
show you a workflow for going through to
that. Okay. Um, I remind you, yeah, this
is the the distribution of a of doing G
holding department constant, right?
That's the direct effect. Does that make
sense? Good. Um, now let's get into the
mechanics of generalized linear models.
Okay.
So, it's just the thing. Here's my dank
meme for the day. So, um it's a thing
about modeling counts is that the
internal mechanics of the machine of the
tide prediction engine are on a scale
called log odds. Uh and if you're a
psychologically healthy human being,
this is not how you think. But soon with
practice, you too can can think in log
odds, right? It's a very kind of natural
scale. Uh and it is actually it emerges
naturally from the fundamental modeling
of counts in nature. It's not something
that statistitians invented just to
torture you. Um so we observe counts but
we estimate probability on the law god
scale usually I'll say what that is of
the events and on the first model in
this course was act also a count model
remember uh we worked with probabilities
back when we tossed this globe this is
why I've left this in the lecture halls
because I wanted I was waiting for this
lecture where I would pick it up again
and remind you about the globe tossing
model. This is the same kind of model.
We're going to do it again today, but
I'm going to talk about the mechanics
much more because we're going to have
predictors on the right hand side. We
need to stratify by things. Okay.
Um, oh yeah, the maximum entropy
classifier on this meme. This is what
machine learning people call the model
we're going to do today because you can
derive it by maximizing entropy. Uh,
which is something I explain in the book
if you're interested in it. There's a
whole chapter on entropy and how it
relates to statistics in the book, which
I love to death, but I I would need an
hour to do it just by itself. Okay, I
apologize. Um,
all right. Generalized linear models
have a structure very similar to linear
models you're you're familiar with. And
linear models, the expected value is
some additive combination of the
parameters. Uh, in generalized linear
models, the expected value is a function
of an additive combination of the
parameters. So here I've just made some
anonymous function f.
Yeah. So we we have this sum an additive
combination of the parameters and we're
going to trans use some function to
transform that into a probability scale.
Um so let me break out the anatomy of
this a little bit more. Um here we have
a 01 outcome. Uh we model that as
Bernoli because that's the only
distribution you would do this as.
Typically, Bernoli is just a coin flip
distribution, a biased coin flip
distribution named after some Swiss ma
Swiss mathematician. I don't know. There
are like nine Berni brothers and they
were all mathematicians and I can't keep
straight which one this is named after,
right? Um, I don't know what the
Bernoli's are doing these days, but I'm
sure they're rich. Yeah, they probably
make chocolate or hoard illegal
moneyaundering or something like that.
Whatever the Swiss are doing these days.
Sorry.
uh p subi is the probability of this
event y subi, right? It's an expect it's
an expectation of a type. It's a
probability across many trials with the
same sets of predictors. We'd expect um
this to be the expected value of the
outcomes. Uh and then we have our um
additive combination. And just like in
linear models, this is any real value.
The whole real number line is legal
here. Yeah. between negative infinity
and positive infinity. Although we don't
usually want to go that far, we want to
stay somewhere around zero ideally. Um
and then we have this function f which
maps the probability scale uh to the
linear scale. It's a transformation and
in Bernoli models in in count models
there's uh very conventional and natural
it emerges naturally from the maximum
entropy classifier approach. There's a
box in the book that proves this for you
if you're interested in the mathematics
um is called the loget link. And the
loget link, let me write it as loget p
subi is equal to the log odds. Uh so let
me explain what's going on here. We call
this log odds because pi over one minus
pi are the odds. It's the probability of
the thing over the probability of the
other thing. Yeah, this is called the
odds. If some of you are gamblers,
you're very familiar with odds because
gamblers talk about odds all the time.
Uh and if you are, you're gambler. Shame
on you. No, [laughter] but you may be
familiar with this. Yeah. Uh, in my
youth, I used to go to Las Vegas and I
am familiar with odds. Yeah. Um,
and, uh, it's the log gods because
there's a log in front of it. Yeah. Uh,
this is a very convenient
transformation, the log odds. Uh,
actually it has it has symmetry. It has
lots of nice properties that we want in
a transformation of a scale. Um, and the
inverse when you convert it back is
called the logistic which population
biologists are familiar with and I'm
going to draw it on the next slide.
Right? The logistic curve is this
scurve. There are lots of scurves but
the logistic is the best.
It arises naturally from population
growth of certain idealized type of
population growth. Um, and the log odd
scale. So what I'm doing on this graph
is on the horizontal we've got the log
odds of the probability. So we've
transformed
um the probability scale to that
additive scale. So the value on the
x-axis is the sum of all of your
parameters and predictors multiplied by
predictors. Okay, that's what the
horizontal axis the the x- axis is. And
the vertical axis is the probability
that corresponds to it and it takes this
scurve. So zero means a half
right right in the middle. It's
important that this is symmetric around
zero. Um and four means nearly always
and minus4 means hardly ever. Just kind
of bracket that in your mind and get
used to this. Yeah. Um, increasingly
bigger numbers are still always and
increasingly smaller numbers are still
never which generates uh certain
identification problems in in nonlinear
models which are it's important that the
stat model have these these inconvenient
properties because that's how nature is.
Yeah, remember the salamander? One thing
kills it, nothing else can kill it,
right? It's it's just how it's supposed
to work. Um, let me show you some
animations and then we'll continue with
the mechanistic part. This is just a
prior predictive simulation of an
anonymous logistic regression. On the on
the left hand side here, I've got a
prior distribution, a very loose prior
distribution for alpha and beta in the
linear model on the log odd scale.
Right? So, alpha and beta are on log odd
scale. Uh, zero means a half, right?
Beta 0 means no effect of the predictor.
Um, and I'm just taking random samples
and animating them around as before in
there. The little red cross uh on the
left graph is the data generating model.
I'm going to start taking samples from
the data generating model soon. Okay?
And then we're going to do basian
updating. On the right, we've got the
prior predictive space for the logistic
curves. And what I want you to see is
that they can go either direction. The
prior has no bias for a positive or
negative effect of the predictor which
is on the horizontal axis and the
vertical axis of this is the probability
of the outcome of the event. Does this
make sense? Yeah.
Um now I'm going to start taking
samples. We're going to add one data
point at a time and do basian updating
and we'll get the now we have a
posterior that's slightly shrunk.
There's two data points, three data
points. Isn't this satisfying? It's just
very look um our machines are learning.
Yes, we get closer. Uh, see how fast you
get contraction. This is the power of
sample size in simple models. If you
want to estimate the mean of something
like 12 data points is incredibly
powerful actually for estimating means.
Um, you want to stratify it, you need a
lot more, but estimating means and we
get contraction. Uh, and it moves
gradually. Um, this is a consistent
estimator. So, as the sample size
increases, the posterior will converge
to the truth with probability one. uh
and you see how it's working there.
Yeah. Okay. So, this is like the
previous thing. Basian updating works
exactly the same way here. It's a nice I
think relaxing thing about being basian
is there's only one kind of way to
process the information. You declare the
generative model and then you do basian
updating. So, we don't have to choose an
estimator here. Good. Does this make
sense? Yeah. All right. Um let's talk
about priors now. So, I did a prior
predictive there. Uh the thing about uh
Berni binomial regressions with loget
links just like all generalized linear
models is since now the the parameters
are on a different scale from the
outcome you have to think a little bit
more about the prior scale but I've
already taught you how to deal with this
you just have to do prior predictive
simulation the implications of the prior
count on the outcome scale not on the
latent scale but you must choose them on
the latent scale I'm sorry this is just
how the world is yeah it's like this all
the time. Uh here's an example. So you
can think about we're going to take
alpha which is the intercept remember in
the linear model here like the world's
simplest logistic regression loit piece
of i equals alpha. Alpha is just the
average log odds of the event. If it's
zero it means a half. If it's four it
means always almost always minus 4
almost never. And let's imagine putting
a Gaussian prior on this which is often
a reasonable thing to do. Okay, so the
top one is uh what you might think of as
a default really flat prior. Normal 010.
That's a normal distribution with a
variance of 100. It's very very flat. Um
lots of textbooks uh in applied based
statistics will tell you that that's a
good prior because it's agnostic. It's
very flat. I'm here to tell you it's a
terrible prior and I'll show you why in
a moment. And then we're going to
consider two narrower ones. One that's
normal uh 0, 1.5 and normal 01.
This is the latent scale. So how do we
project these these distributions to the
outcome scale? Well, we take each of
them and we do the transformation. You
can take a sample from take a bunch of
samples from each of these distributions
and just transform those samples to the
probability scale using the the logistic
function, right? That's all that loget
means. And when you do that, um this is
what you get. So for the first one, it
turns out this very wide flat prior on
um alpha on the log odd scale implies
that uh uh uh an outcome distribution
where things are almost never happening
or always happening. Why? Because almost
all the probability mass is outside of
four and minus 4, right? A normal 010 is
extremely wide on the log odd scale. So
it's saying that we expect almost all of
the events to be on or off. And that's
what you're seeing in the upper right.
Yeah, challenges your imagination
because you think that the middle point
is somehow special and it's going to
show up. But the whole distribution is
what matters and where the mass is
distributed. And that wide gaussian
distribution has a bunch of mass out at
like 20, which means always. 10 also
means always, right? So if you integrate
over that thing, you get this very weird
biodal distribution on the probability
scale. This is not a good prior because
that is not usually what you think,
right? Sometimes it might be, in which
case, go ahead, knock yourself out, but
it's not what you think. The other prior
are more reasonable. If you want a flat
prior, um, on the outcome scale, normal
01.5 gets you pretty close. That gives
you a pretty flat across probability
prior. Yeah, there's no way you could
intuitit this, right? That you just have
to do the prior predictive simulation.
And as you start adding predictors, uh,
that's going to increase the variance of
the prior. So you need to make all of
these priors narrower just to keep this
thing flat. Yeah, but you can do that.
I've already taught you how. Just do the
prior predictive simulation. You can
totally solve the problem on your own.
Um, I prefer things even a bit narrower
because I like regularization. So the
bottom would be my conventional choice
quite often, right? I'm skeptical of
extremely high and extremely low event
probabilities before I see the data.
Right? and and there's a whole chapter
in the book u I'm sorry I haven't
haven't gone into it as much in this in
in lecture about overfitting and how
much of a hazard that is uh you should
definitely read that chapter
regularization is a good thing okay
let's talk about mechanics um uh here's
doing the prior predictive simulation to
show you uh I keep telling you you
should do the prior predictive
simulation so I would be an if I
didn't give you code right so here's
some code you can modify
right? And put in your own linear models
into uh how do we do prior predictive
simulation? We sample from the priors as
we define them. So we sample here I'm
doing uh 10 to the fourth samples from
for alpha and beta. That's way more than
I'm going to draw on the graph but just
to show you. Then I make a sequence
across the x values that I want to
simulate over. Um and then I just do the
inverse loget. Inverse loget is another
name for logistic. So inverse loget of
the linear model transforms onto the
probability scale. Now we have uh
probability curves and then I just plot
them and we get these plots here. So for
alpha 0 normal 010 and beta normal 010
you get these really strong
relationships in the prior is what the
model thinks. It's like a prior that's
saying X is really strongly positively
or negatively related um uh a priori to
the outcome. That probably isn't where
you want the prior centered, right? You
want something that's closer to zero.
Yeah. Uh but you know, knock yourself
out. So here's here's how what you see
when we change it to 0 comma 1.5 and 0
comma 0.5. You get things that are much
weaker op priori relationships between
the things and then the data has to
overcome the skepticism of the model.
Yeah. Which I think is a better
situation to be in. Yeah. Does that make
sense? Okay. Let's return to Berkeley.
Um, we're going to model these data.
Now, uh, these data are not disagregated
into 01 counts, but they you could do
that. I'm going to show you in a few
slides what I mean. They're aggregated
into counts. And so, we're going to
model them using something called a
binomial. So, here's the distinction.
When people say logistic regression, uh,
they might also mean they might just
mean it has a logit link, but usually
what that means is the outcome is a 01
binary on or off. That's usually what
logistic regression means when people
say it. Um, and that's when that
corresponds to a Berni distribution for
the likelihood. Uh, the binomial
regression is when we've aggregated for
all of the applications that have the
same predictor values, that is the same
department and gender. We just aggregate
the counts. We count up all the ones.
Yeah. And that's then we have an
aggregate count. And that's a binomial
variable. A binomial is you do a bunch
of coin flips and you count how many
heads you got, right? So that's what it
is. But in this type of modeling case,
we need to make sure that all the right
hand side variables are the same. You'll
get the same estimates. This is this is
just about how you format the data, but
you're going to get the same posterior
distribution modeling the same data set
either way. You can always move between
them and do it both ways. Um here's in
this data set, here's the difference. uh
we think about an aggregated data set on
the right where G is is gender and D is
department just for two departments and
then we have um the number of
acceptances in the A column and the
total number of applications in N. We
can disagregate or explode each of those
four rows on the right into um N. So row
one on the right implies 355
rows on the left. Yeah. With zero and
one, right? There will be 30 ones and uh
uh zeros. Yeah. So, it'll be a really
long table which goes all the way into
the basement. Uh but it's totally fine
and it'll still run fine, too. It won't
run as fast. It'll be slower, but it's
you're going to get the same posterior
distribution. Does this make sense?
We're working with the ver version on
the right because I think it's better
for teaching. But if you come across a
data set which is already zeros and
ones, you don't need to convert it. It's
totally fine to to work with it that
way. Okay, here's the code. Um
uh I think the only thing of comment
here is to note in the ulam code uh the
binomial I have the word binomial there
now and you literally just write the
link function in front of P. Yeah, when
you when you're writing ulam code,
you're writing functions that are going
to get processed in stand. So you could
just write these things in like that. Um
the first thing we're going to estimate
is the total effect. So the design of
this model is just to stratify by
gender. And the linear model is just an
alpha subset by G. So that means there's
two alphas. There's a vector of length
two because there's only two
self-reported genders in this. It was
1973,
right? And uh uh and so that's all it
does. Does this make sense? And how it
corresponds to the estim total causal
effect. We're just going to stratify by
gender. um the direct effect uh since
you are all masters of deparation now
you know what you need to do you need to
stratify by department
um and I'm going to do the full
interaction stratification because uh
that's my default so we're going to have
a matrix of alphas now uh indexed by G
and D so we're going to have four uh or
sorry more than four because there's
like six departments right so we've got
two genders by six departments so 12
alphas right for each department we
estimate two alphas. That's the full
stratification. Yeah,
we're estimating the the the gender
specific probability of admission in
every department.
Yeah, this is the right uh the right
estimator for this question. Does that
make sense? Um people always ask me uh
do you have to do the full interaction?
And the answer is no. But I leave that
as an exercise for the student. You
could have an alpha um stratified by
gender and then a separate set of
parameters for the average admission
rate in each department. And you're
going to get very similar uh estimates
in this data set.
But the full interaction is the default,
right? That's what the DAG assumes. DAGs
and all the logic of do calculus assume
full interactions. U there's a tradition
in particular in psychology and parts of
biology to think of interaction effects
as really exceptional things that you
have to justify with uh I don't think
that at all. I think the default is the
full interaction model and you should
argue your way from it. Uh but
statistitians disagree about these
things. Um but uh remember I've tried to
convince you um the the model
pre-exist the data set right? So you've
got a generative model and an estimator
the structure of the statistical model.
the fact that your data set is small
should not change the estimator.
Yeah, that's not a that's a flaw with
your sample, not with the model. That's
what I keep trying to convince you. So,
taking out interaction effects because
you can't estimate them, I think, is
usually the wrong thing to do. Yeah. You
you you need to estimate them because of
the design of your study. Deleting them
from the model is not progress. Am I
convincing you of this? I know it's it's
like the opposite advice that you've
probably received other times where
people have told you, "You can't
estimate this. they'll put it in the
model. I this is backwards thinking.
It's completely backwards thinking. I'm
not saying you will be able to estimate
it. But I'm saying you shouldn't make
claims about the estimate you've already
stated if you can't estimate the model
that's required. Yeah. Does that make
sense? Yeah. I will try this sermon
again on you. I promise. Okay. Uh uh so
you'll see in the ulam code here I
declare a matrix with margins G and D.
What that means is it counts up the
number of unique values in G and D and
makes a matrix of those dimensions. Here
I think it's 2x six.
Yeah. Or 2x five. I think it's six. Six
departments. Yeah. Does that make sense?
And then in the linear model when we we
pull out the particular G&D for each,
there's a separate alpha that's
estimated for every combination of
gender and department. Good.
Um still teaching you MCMC workflow. So
let's do the diagnostics. Uh here's the
um effective sample sizes on the left.
We have this this scatter plot of
effective sample sizes by R hat for
every parameter. Uh this is good. Uh you
want all the parameters on the bottom R
hat near one. Uh and you want effective
sample sizes way above 10% of your total
sample size. And here they're they're
definitely way above that. This is a
chain that's easy to sample from. Uh and
then these are these trace rank plots
that I like. Um they look good. This is
what healthy trace rank plots should
look like. They're all jumbled up like
tapestries.
Yeah. No, no particular color in any of
those is always above or below the
others. That's what you're That's what
you're looking for. Good. Yeah. Okay. Um
we can look at the marginal posteriors
of these and also see the diagnostics,
the R hats and the SS's. Um on the left
there's just two parameters. So there's
just two to see. Uh this is a simple
enough model on the log odd scale.
Remember that the precy output there the
rows in that blue table are on the log
odd scale. So you've got to you can
either use code to transform them or
eventually you get so good at thinking
in log odds you can do this in your mind
right remember zero is 0.5 probability
right so each of these uh is is less
than zero which means the average
probability of mission is less than fair
in for both genders but one of them is
lower than the other. Yeah. Uh and
gender one here is uh is women and
gender two is men. Right. So in the
total data set women are are have a
lower probability of acceptance than
men. Do you see that? Yeah. This is
worth transforming onto the probability
scale and you should do that and I do it
in the book. But this is you get
practice just like glancing at the
table. Yeah. You've also got to
transform the uh intervals. And so this
is the thing you don't want to do in
your head. uh use the inverse loget but
using the posterior samples but you can
get a get a sign from it right away. And
then on the right, this is a mess,
right? This is just a total mess. And if
you stared at this long enough, maybe
you could figure out, but this is deep
in tide prediction engine land already.
So, we're going to process these
samples. Um, oh, wait. I had a joke
about this, right? You get good enough.
You I don't know if anybody has seen The
Matrix here. It's an old movie at this
point. It's from last century. Uh but
there's a great scene in it where this
uh one of the subvillains, this guy um
has a great line about how he just reads
these monitors and he can actually just
see uh the lives of people taking place
inside the matrix in them. This is what
you get like as an applied statistician
with log gods. You can really just like
read the log gods. You just see almost
always almost never. It it happens
remarkably fast. Okay, so here's the
update. We're up to some estimates. Now,
we need to push these out to predictions
and inferences because more important
than ever, these parameters are on an
inconvenient scale and they're going to
interact uh to produce predictions. So,
we need to um use the generative model
to push forward onto simulated
interventions and descriptions of the
population. So, let's start with the
total effect.
Uh what we do here, we're going to
create a causal contrast. We imagine an
intervention uh on reported gender, not
an actual gender, but reported gender.
You can imagine like changing doing an
experiment on the admissions officers
and relabeling all the names right of
the applications. Um and so we construct
first a population where everybody every
application is from a woman that's uh
probability of admission_g1
and we just do the inverse loget on
alpha all the alphas all the samples for
alpha 1 that's what that means and then
another imaginary population where all
the uh reported genders have been
manipulated to be so the applications
are from men um and we get that uh
prediction and then we we we construct
the difference on the probability scale,
not on the log odd scale. So it's you're
going to get a different answer if you
do the subtraction on the log odd scale
and it's wrong, right? Because what's
different is the probabilities, not the
log gods. Logs are gears in the tide
prediction engine. So you want to push
everything to the outcome scale and then
do the contrast always. Okay? Leave it
as an exercise to a student to prove if
you do the order differently, you're
going to get a different answer. It will
be wrong. Yeah. So it's important to do
do this right. that if you're concerned
like how would you ever know, summarize
last.
Push forward to the outcome distribution
for each of your simulations always all
the way to the end to the outcome
distribution and then do summaries. And
those summaries involve calculating
means, doing differences, whatever it
is. But you always summarize last and
you will never make a mistake. Okay?
Trust me, I promise you
that's the way to remember this. Yeah.
Um and we see here uh this is this uh uh
men have an advantage in the total uh
population of applications in this um
it's it's not very precisely estimated
but you know somewhere uh between um
um or say that women have a disadvantage
somewhere between8
and 0.1 units of probability in the
total sample which which is not good,
right? That's but we don't know. We
still have to decompose that into the
different paths. Does this make sense so
far? Yeah. Um All right. Here's the
direct effect. I think I just have time
to finish this lecture. This is great.
Uh so the direct effect, I'm going to
work through this in stages. So I I
realize this is very ugly and
complicated, right? It's like, you know,
data visualization is my passion, right?
Kind of plot. This is like one of the
worst plots I've ever made. It gets
going to get worse though soon in a
couple slides, but I'm building up to
something just to show you tried to
illustrate these complicated effects. So
the direct effect uh depends upon the
department,
right? Remember I did a full interaction
for every department. I've got uh the
probability of admission for each
gender. Uh so we can look at the
contrast between men and women in e
every department. And that's what I'm
doing on this graph. I've done the
contrast on the left, but now by each
department, and I haven't labeled these
departments to avoid shaming the
innocent or the guilty as the case may
be, but you could have your theories I
want to show you is um there's a
diversity of effects. There's this red
department on the right where women are
advantaged
uh by quite a lot. Um, and then there
are a number of departments where men
are slightly advantaged and then there's
that yellow one which is quite fair and
right in the middle and also the cyan
one where there there seems to be almost
no difference. There's a diversity of
effects across departments which is
probably not too surprising to you but
it means there's really heterogeneous
effects and the total effect depends
upon the weight of applications across
these departments. Yeah, you with me?
Um,
uh, the red is engineering, by the way.
I think [laughter] if you're if you're
wondering, there weren't a lot of women
who applied to it in 1973, but most of
them got in. And I'm going to
problematize
uh the interpretation of that next
lecture, I think, for you. Okay. Um,
uh, so now we're still in the trying to
understand what what is the average
effect now, uh, across departments when
we stratify um, uh, by department. That
is what is the average direct effect. We
stratified by department so that we
could isolate this bottom path. Remember
the the path that feels the most like
discrimination, the taste based
discrimination, right? You want to
picture the uh the sexist uh uh reviewer
who's just angry that this woman thinks
she can be an engineer or something like
that. I'm joking, but I'm not. Right?
This stuff this stuff happens. And so we
we can isolate that effect now if we're
willing to assume this is the DAG. But
if we were going to say what's the
average effect um across women uh uh uh
applications uh what would it be? Well,
it depends upon the distribution of
applications across departments. So
let's just take let's start with the
empirical distribution in this data set
across departments right um and in that
case so here I know this is a bit of
code but you can work through it at
home. By the way this script is in the
scripts folder. Yeah all the scripts are
in the scripts folder. So you can
reproduce all of my plots and all the
examples with the with the R code in the
scripts folder. So we've got a first
thing I do is I count up all of the
empirical total applications. I
construct a fake data set where I'm
going to do simulations for where I've
got the same number of applications now
are going to happen and and I'm going to
do trials on each of them to see if they
get accepted or not using the samples
from the posterior distribution. Um, and
then I average across all the
departments here. What are the total
fates? And we get this very weird
looking distribution on the right. Uh,
but you know where this came from,
right? That lump on the right is
engineering. Yeah. Um, but this is what
causal effects can look like in look
like in the real world. They can be
quite heterogeneous uh depending. So the
average you can take the expectation of
this whole distribution and it's a
little bit uh positive actually. But
that would be a weird thing to report
given the shape of this distribution,
right? Because it's biodal.
Yeah, I like this example for this
reason. But there's nothing unrealistic
about this. This is real data. Yeah.
Does this make sense how I've gotten to
this? Um,
uh, we can disagregate this, right? You
can see where it comes from. I should
have advanced to this already. You can
kind of just see I've smooshed together,
uh, smoosh is a mathematical word.
smoosh together the bottom to get the
top. Yeah, integrate, I think, is
[laughter] is a better term here. Uh,
last thing I want to do is postratify.
We might want to make predictions for
someplace other than 1973 Berkeley,
right? Uh, say you wanted to to use
these probabilities per department to
make predictions for another UC campus,
right? With a different distribution of
applications across departments. There
are other campuses. So for example at
Berkeley is a big engineering school. It
was back then it still is. Yeah. Uh big
computer science school now. Computer
science was not a huge field at the time
but 73. But um other UC's are different
right? They don't have as big of
engineering school. So they're going to
be fewer applications in this and then
less exposure to that situation for
applications. Does that make sense? How
do you do that calculation? Uh well I'm
here to help you. Yeah. So this is a
very powerful technique. It's a routine
thing in applied statistics called post
stratification. So we've done the
estimation, we have a posterior
distribution, we want to make um uh
calculate a causal effect as there's a
hypothetical intervention, but it might
be on a different target population or
it might be on the total population we
took a sample from because the sample is
not is not randomly sampled. So if all
survey work does this or should, right?
If you do um an internet poll or a
telephone poll, no one answers to
telephones anymore, so you can't do a
telephone poll, but uh some kind of
poll, you're going to get responders and
they're not responding in proportion to
their proportion in the general
population you want to make a prediction
for. So all election forecasting is like
this, right? You're going to get
particular you're going to get over
representation of old people in your
poll and under reppresentation of young
people happens in almost all election
forecasting, all all polling. Then you
need to rewe your sample, right? You're
going to construct estimates for each
combination of the demographic effects,
age and gender and whatever, you know,
location uh uh for the people who did
respond and then you're going to
postratify that, project it to the
actual demography of the population
that's going to have an election. Does
that make sense? Yeah. Question. What
happens that you don't have the
like if they were accepted or not but
you have the applications which is not
why you
>> exactly. So it's like we we so in the
context of yeah in this in this case
we're going to predict for a different
school. We're going to know how many
applications there are and we want to
make a prediction of the acceptance
rates and the total discrimination that
we anticipate and then we could design
interventions like where would we where
would we go in the election forecasting
example? it's that you've taken a very
small sample of the general electorate.
It is not stratified like the real
electorate. The age groups are
completely out of balance. Uh the the
income groups are completely out of
balance. But you have that data about
the electorate separately external to
your model. So now you transport the
estimates for each of the demographic
categories to make a prediction about
the election. And that's absolutely
essential to to realistic election
forecasting. Um and it sometimes it's
hard because uh there will be um strong
partisanship in some demographic
subcategories that are really hard to
sample uh in these things. So that that
it's become increasingly difficult I
think to do this but it's still
possible. Okay, this is enough talking
but that's what postratification is.
This is uh just a standard part of the
applied statistics toolkit. um it's
really important uh for transporting
causal effects and it doesn't take a lot
of code at least in simple examples like
this. I'm just going to make up uh some
some numbers of applications for an
imaginary UC and that's what I do at the
top there. Apps per department. I just
say um there are six new departments and
I'm going to give the first one five
applications and all the others 10. The
raw numbers don't matter here because I
can just keep sampling from it in the
posterior distribution to get the
expectations. Uh if you make these like
multiply them all by 100, it'll just
take longer. You'll get the same
distribution. Um uh but this is these
are data you would collect, right? Or or
they might be part of another model,
right? We anticipate from last year's
applications this many and then you can
use last year's application counts to
make predictions for the new year.
Something like that. Does this make
sense so far? And then the rest of the
code is the same as previously. I've
just rigged uh uh fake numbers of
applications in here. And then it
reweights. What I've done is I've
downweighted department one, which is
the engineering one on the far right.
And you you see it changes the
distribution.
Yeah, because this would be some school
some UC where engineering is not as big
like UC Davis or something like that.
Does this make some sense? This is a
really important technique. comes it's
really useful in lots of cases
especially in the human sciences where
we're projecting onto some population
with a particular age structure and age
is such a very powerful effect in human
behavior. Yeah. Well, it's weird to call
age and effect. It's an index of of
things that cause effects. Yeah. Does
this make some sense? Okay.
Um right. So where are we? We have
reached the end. I am right on time.
This is amazing. This never happens. So
uh where are we so far? uh is there
evidence for discrimination here? I
think there is of different sorts. There
there real structural effects for sure
because the total causal effect in this
population is that an application from a
woman had lower odds of acceptance. Uh a
lot of that arises in this data set
because different departments have
radically different probabilities of
accepting application. Some of them are
vastly oversubscribed and women tend to
apply more to the ones that are overs
subscribed. At least they did in 1973.
And that results in this kind of
structural discrimination across
departments. There's also evidence I
think of direct discrimination in some
cases and in other cases maybe evidence
like in engineering of anti-
discrimination or positive
discrimination we call it here right but
in the next lecture I want to
problematize that a bit because we
haven't talked about um unmeasured
confounding
uh which can mask here's this gives away
the this is a spoiler alert but that can
mask discrimination.
Yeah. Okay. Um, with that, thank you
very much for your attention and
tolerating my rants. Um, and I will see
you next time.